Automatic compaction API documentation refactor (#14740)
apache/druid: docs/api-reference/automatic-compaction-api.md

  ~ under the License.
  -->

> This topic describes status and configuration API endpoints for [automatic compaction](../data-management/automatic-compaction.md) in Apache Druid. You can configure automatic compaction in the Druid web console or API. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This topic describes the status and configuration API endpoints for [automatic compaction](../data-management/automatic-compaction.md) in Apache Druid. You can configure automatic compaction in the Druid web console or API. 
```

In this topic, `http://ROUTER_IP:ROUTER_PORT` is a placeholder for your Router service address and port. Replace it with the information for your deployment. For example, use `http://localhost:8888` for quickstart deployments.

## Manage automatic compaction

### Update capacity for compaction tasks

> Update the capacity for compaction tasks. The minimum number of compaction tasks is 1 and the maximum is 2147483652.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Updates the capacity for compaction tasks. The minimum number of compaction tasks is 1 and the maximum is 2147483652.
```

* `ratio` (optional)
  * Type: Float
  * Default: 0.1
  * Limit the ratio of the total task slots to compaction task slots.
* `max` (optional)
  * Type: Int
  * Default: 2147483647
  * Limit the maximum number of task slots for compaction tasks.

#### Responses

<!--DOCUSAURUS_CODE_TABS-->

<!--200 SUCCESS-->

*Successfully updated compaction configuration* 

<!--404 NOT FOUND-->

*Invalid `max` value* 

<!--END_DOCUSAURUS_CODE_TABS-->

---

#### Sample request

<!--DOCUSAURUS_CODE_TABS-->

<!--cURL-->

```shell
curl --request POST "http://ROUTER_IP:ROUTER_PORT/druid/coordinator/v1/config/compaction/taskslots?ratio=0.2&max=250000"
```

<!--HTTP-->

```HTTP
POST /druid/coordinator/v1/config/compaction/taskslots?ratio=0.2&max=250000 HTTP/1.1
Host: http://ROUTER_IP:ROUTER_PORT
```

<!--END_DOCUSAURUS_CODE_TABS-->

#### Sample response

A successful request returns an HTTP `200 OK` message code and an empty response body.

### Create or update automatic compaction configuration

Creates or updates the automatic compaction configuration for a datasource. You pass the automatic compaction as a JSON object in the request body.

> Automatic compaction configuration require only the `dataSource` property. Druid fills all other properties with default values if not specified. See [Automatic compaction dynamic configuration](../configuration/index.md#automatic-compaction-dynamic-configuration) for configuration details.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The automatic compaction configuration requires only the `dataSource` property. Druid fills all other properties with default values if not specified. See [Automatic compaction dynamic configuration](../configuration/index.md#automatic-compaction-dynamic-configuration) for configuration details.
```

Note that this endpoint returns an HTTP `200 OK` message code even if the datasource name does not exist.

#### URL 

<code class="postAPI">POST</code> <code>/druid/coordinator/v1/config/compaction</code>

#### Responses

<!--DOCUSAURUS_CODE_TABS-->

<!--200 SUCCESS-->

*Successfully submitted auto compaction configuration* 

<!--END_DOCUSAURUS_CODE_TABS-->

---
#### Sample request

> The following example creates an automatic compaction configuration for datasource `wikipedia_hour`. This automatic compaction configuration performs compaction on `wikipedia_hour`, resulting in compacted segments that represent a day interval of data. In this example: 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following example creates an automatic compaction configuration for datasource `wikipedia_hour`. This automatic compaction configuration performs compaction on `wikipedia_hour`, resulting in compacted segments that represent a day interval of data. 

In this example: 
```

> #### Query parameters

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Query parameters

To limit the maximum number of compaction tasks, use the optional query parameters `ratio` and `max`:
```

A successful request returns an HTTP `200 OK` message code and an empty response body.

### Remove automatic compaction configuration

Removes the automatic compaction configuration for a datasource. This updates the compaction status of the datasource to "Not enabled." 

#### URL

<code class="deleteAPI">DELETE</code> <code>/druid/coordinator/v1/config/compaction/:dataSource</code>

#### Responses

<!--DOCUSAURUS_CODE_TABS-->

<!--200 SUCCESS-->

*Successfully deleted automatic compaction configuration* 

<!--404 NOT FOUND-->

*Datasource does not have automatic compaction or invalid datasource name* 

<!--END_DOCUSAURUS_CODE_TABS-->

---

#### Sample request

<!--DOCUSAURUS_CODE_TABS-->

<!--cURL-->

```shell
curl --request DELETE "http://ROUTER_IP:ROUTER_PORT/druid/coordinator/v1/config/compaction/wikipedia_hour"
```

<!--HTTP-->

```HTTP
DELETE /druid/coordinator/v1/config/compaction/wikipedia_hour HTTP/1.1
Host: http://ROUTER_IP:ROUTER_PORT
```

<!--END_DOCUSAURUS_CODE_TABS-->

#### Sample response

A successful request returns an HTTP `200 OK` message code and an empty response body.

## Automatic compaction configuration

### Get all automatic compaction configurations

> Retrieves all automatic compaction configurations. Returns a `compactionConfigs` object containing the active automatic compaction configuration of all datasources.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Retrieves all automatic compaction configurations. Returns a `compactionConfigs` object containing the active automatic compaction configurations of all datasources.
```

                "indexSpecForIntermediatePersists": null,
                "maxPendingPersists": null,
                "pushTimeout": null,
                "segmentWriteOutMediumFactory": null,
                "maxNumConcurrentSubTasks": null,
                "maxRetry": null,
                "taskStatusCheckPeriodMs": null,
                "chatHandlerTimeout": null,
                "chatHandlerNumRetries": null,
                "maxNumSegmentsToMerge": null,
                "totalNumMergeTasks": null,
                "maxColumnsToMerge": null,
                "type": "index_parallel",
                "forceGuaranteedRollup": false
            },
            "granularitySpec": {
                "segmentGranularity": "DAY",
                "queryGranularity": null,
                "rollup": null
            },
            "dimensionsSpec": null,
            "metricsSpec": null,
            "transformSpec": null,
            "ioConfig": null,
            "taskContext": null
        }
    ],
    "compactionTaskSlotRatio": 0.1,
    "maxCompactionTaskSlots": 2147483647,
    "useAutoScaleSlots": false
}
```
</details>

### Get automatic compaction configuration

> Retrieves the automatic compaction configuration of a datasource.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Retrieves the automatic compaction configuration for a datasource.
```

        "maxNumConcurrentSubTasks": null,
        "maxRetry": null,
        "taskStatusCheckPeriodMs": null,
        "chatHandlerTimeout": null,
        "chatHandlerNumRetries": null,
        "maxNumSegmentsToMerge": null,
        "totalNumMergeTasks": null,
        "maxColumnsToMerge": null,
        "type": "index_parallel",
        "forceGuaranteedRollup": false
    },
    "granularitySpec": {
        "segmentGranularity": "DAY",
        "queryGranularity": null,
        "rollup": null
    },
    "dimensionsSpec": null,
    "metricsSpec": null,
    "transformSpec": null,
    "ioConfig": null,
    "taskContext": null
}
```
</details>

### Get automatic compaction configuration history

Retrieves the history of the automatic compaction configuration for a datasource. Returns an empty list if the  datasource does not exist or there is no compaction history for the datasource.

The response contains a list of objects with the following keys:
* `globalConfig`: A JSON object containing automatic compaction configuration that applies to the entire cluster. 
* `compactionConfig`: A JSON object containing the automatic compaction configuration for the datasource.

> * `auditInfo`: A JSON object that contains information about the change made, such as `author`, `comment` or `ip`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `auditInfo`: A JSON object containing information about the change made, such as `author`, `comment` or `ip`.
```

                "maxPendingPersists": null,
                "pushTimeout": null,
                "segmentWriteOutMediumFactory": null,
                "maxNumConcurrentSubTasks": null,
                "maxRetry": null,
                "taskStatusCheckPeriodMs": null,
                "chatHandlerTimeout": null,
                "chatHandlerNumRetries": null,
                "maxNumSegmentsToMerge": null,
                "totalNumMergeTasks": null,
                "maxColumnsToMerge": null,
                "type": "index_parallel",
                "forceGuaranteedRollup": false
            },
            "granularitySpec": {
                "segmentGranularity": "DAY",
                "queryGranularity": null,
                "rollup": null
            },
            "dimensionsSpec": null,
            "metricsSpec": null,
            "transformSpec": null,
            "ioConfig": null,
            "taskContext": null
        },
        "auditInfo": {
            "author": "",
            "comment": "",
            "ip": "127.0.0.1"
        },
        "auditTime": "2023-07-31T18:16:16.362Z"
    }
]
```
</details>

## Automatic compaction status

### Get segments awaiting compaction

> Returns the total size of segments awaiting compaction for the given datasource. The specified datasource must have automatic compaction enabled.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Returns the total size of segments awaiting compaction for a given datasource. The specified datasource must have automatic compaction enabled.
```

#### URL

<code class="getAPI">GET</code> <code>/druid/coordinator/v1/compaction/progress?dataSource=:dataSource</code>

#### Query parameter
* `dataSource` (required)
  * Type: String

>   * Name of the datasource for this status information

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  * Name of the datasource for this status information.
```

#### Responses

<!--DOCUSAURUS_CODE_TABS-->

<!--200 SUCCESS-->

*Successfully retrieved segment size awaiting compaction* 

<!--404 NOT FOUND-->

*Unknown datasource name or datasource does not have automatic compaction enabled* 

<!--END_DOCUSAURUS_CODE_TABS-->

---

#### Sample request

The following example retrieves the remaining segments to be compacted for datasource `wikipedia_hour`.

<!--DOCUSAURUS_CODE_TABS-->

<!--cURL-->

```shell
curl "http://ROUTER_IP:ROUTER_PORT/druid/coordinator/v1/compaction/progress?dataSource=wikipedia_hour"
```

<!--HTTP-->

```HTTP
GET /druid/coordinator/v1/compaction/progress?dataSource=wikipedia_hour HTTP/1.1
Host: http://ROUTER_IP:ROUTER_PORT
```

<!--END_DOCUSAURUS_CODE_TABS-->

#### Sample response

<details>
  <summary>Click to show sample response</summary>

```json
{
    "remainingSegmentSize": 7615837
}
```
</details>

### Get compaction status and statistics

> Retrieves the status and statistics from the automatic compaction run of all datasources which have automatic compaction enabled in the latest run. Returns a list of `latestStatus` objects. Each `latestStatus` represents the status for a datasource with automatic compaction enabled.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Retrieves an array of `latestStatus` objects representing the status and statistics from the latest automatic compaction run for all datasources with automatic compaction enabled. 
```

> The `latestStatus` object has the following keys:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `latestStatus` object has the following properties:
```

* `dataSource`: Name of the datasource for this status information.

> * `scheduleStatus`: Automatic compaction scheduling status. Possible values are `NOT_ENABLED` and `RUNNING`. Returns `RUNNING ` if the dataSource has an active automatic compaction config submitted. Otherwise, returns `NOT_ENABLED`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `scheduleStatus`: Automatic compaction scheduling status. Possible values are `NOT_ENABLED` and `RUNNING`. Returns `RUNNING ` if the datasource has an active automatic compaction configuration submitted. Otherwise, returns `NOT_ENABLED`.
```

* `bytesAwaitingCompaction`: Total bytes of this datasource waiting to be compacted by the automatic compaction (only consider intervals/segments that are eligible for automatic compaction).

> * `bytesCompacted`: Total bytes of this datasource that are already compacted with the spec set in the automatic compaction config.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `bytesCompacted`: Total bytes of this datasource that are already compacted with the spec set in the automatic compaction configuration.
```

> * `bytesCompacted`: Total bytes of this datasource that are already compacted with the spec set in the automatic compaction config.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `bytesCompacted`: Total bytes of this datasource that are already compacted with the spec set in the automatic compaction configuration.
```

* `bytesSkipped`: Total bytes of this datasource that are skipped (not eligible for automatic compaction) by the automatic compaction.
* `segmentCountAwaitingCompaction`: Total number of segments of this datasource waiting to be compacted by the automatic compaction (only consider intervals/segments that are eligible for automatic compaction).

> * `segmentCountCompacted`: Total number of segments of this datasource that are already compacted with the spec set in the automatic compaction config.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `segmentCountCompacted`: Total number of segments of this datasource that are already compacted with the spec set in the automatic compaction configuration.
```

* `segmentCountSkipped`: Total number of segments of this datasource that are skipped (not eligible for automatic compaction) by the automatic compaction.
* `intervalCountAwaitingCompaction`: Total number of intervals of this datasource waiting to be compacted by the automatic compaction (only consider intervals/segments that are eligible for automatic compaction).

> * `intervalCountCompacted`: Total number of intervals of this datasource that are already compacted with the spec set in the automatic compaction config.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `intervalCountCompacted`: Total number of intervals of this datasource that are already compacted with the spec set in the automatic compaction configuration.
```

* `intervalCountSkipped`: Total number of intervals of this datasource that are skipped (not eligible for automatic compaction) by the automatic compaction.

#### URL

<code class="getAPI">GET</code> <code>/druid/coordinator/v1/compaction/status</code>

#### Query parameters
* `dataSource` (optional)
  * Type: String

>   * Filter the result by name of specific datasource.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  * Filter the result by name of a specific datasource.
```

#### Responses

<!--DOCUSAURUS_CODE_TABS-->

<!--200 SUCCESS-->

*Successfully retrieved `latestStatus` object* 

<!--END_DOCUSAURUS_CODE_TABS-->

---
#### Sample request

<!--DOCUSAURUS_CODE_TABS-->

<!--cURL-->

```shell

> curl "hhttp://ROUTER_IP:ROUTER_PORT/druid/coordinator/v1/compaction/status"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
curl "http://ROUTER_IP:ROUTER_PORT/druid/coordinator/v1/compaction/status"
```

                "maxPendingPersists": null,
                "pushTimeout": null,
                "segmentWriteOutMediumFactory": null,
                "maxNumConcurrentSubTasks": null,
                "maxRetry": null,
                "taskStatusCheckPeriodMs": null,
                "chatHandlerTimeout": null,
                "chatHandlerNumRetries": null,
                "maxNumSegmentsToMerge": null,
                "totalNumMergeTasks": null,
                "maxColumnsToMerge": null,
                "type": "index_parallel",
                "forceGuaranteedRollup": false
            },
            "granularitySpec": {
                "segmentGranularity": "DAY",
                "queryGranularity": null,
                "rollup": null
            },
            "dimensionsSpec": null,
            "metricsSpec": null,
            "transformSpec": null,
            "ioConfig": null,
            "taskContext": null
        },
        "auditInfo": {
            "author": "",
            "comment": "",
            "ip": "127.0.0.1"
        },
        "auditTime": "2023-07-31T18:16:16.362Z"
    }
]
```
</details>

## Automatic compaction status

### Get segments awaiting compaction

> Returns the total size of segments awaiting compaction for a given datasource. The specified datasource must have automatic compaction enabled.

Reviewer 2: If it doesn't, does this request fail, or return an empty response?
